This page intentionally left blank
Algorithms
FOURTH EDITION
This page intentionally left blank
Algorithms
Robert Sedgewick
and
Kevin Wayne
Princeton University
FOURTH EDITION
Upper Saddle River, NJ • Boston • Indianapolis • San Francisco
New York • Toronto • Montreal • London • Munich • Paris • Madrid
Capetown • Sydney • Tokyo • Singapore • Mexico City
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as
trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark
claim, the designations have been printed with initial capital letters or in all capitals.
The authors and publisher have taken care in the preparation of this book, but make no expressed or implied
warranty of any kind and assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. No liability is assumed
for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of the use of the information or
programs contained herein.
The publisher offers excellent discounts on this book when ordered in quantity for bulk purchases or
special sales, which may include electronic versions and/or custom covers and content particular to your
business, training goals, marketing focus, and branding interests. For more information, please contact:
U.S. Corporate and Government Sales
(800) 382-3419
corpsales@pearsontechgroup.com
For sales outside the United States, please contact:
International Sales
international@pearson.com
Visit us on the Web: informit.com/aw
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file with the Library of Congress.
Copyright © 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is protected by copyright,
and permission must be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in
a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or likewise. For information regarding permissions, write to:
Pearson Education, Inc.
Rights and Contracts Department
501 Boylston Street, Suite 900
Boston, MA 02116
Fax: (617) 671-3447
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-57351-3
ISBN-10: 0-321-57351-X
Text printed in the United States on recycled paper at Courier in Westford, Massachusetts.
First printing, March 2011
______________________________
To Adam, Andrew, Brett, Robbie
and especially Linda
______________________________
___________________
To Jackie and Alex
___________________
vi
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .viii
1 Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
1.1 Basic Programming Model 8
1.2 Data Abstraction 64
1.3 Bags, Queues, and Stacks 120
1.4 Analysis of Algorithms 172
1.5 Case Study: Union-Find 216
2 Sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
2.1 Elementary Sorts 244
2.2 Mergesort 270
2.3 Quicksort 288
2.4 Priority Queues 308
2.5 Applications 336
3 Searching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
3.1 Symbol Tables 362
3.2 Binary Search Trees 396
3.3 Balanced Search Trees 424
3.4 Hash Tables 458
3.5 Applications 486
CONTENTS
vii
4 Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 515
4.1 Undirected Graphs 518
4.2 Directed Graphs 566
4.3 Minimum Spanning Trees 604
4.4 Shortest Paths 638
5 Strings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 695
5.1 String Sorts 702
5.2 Tries 730
5.3 Substring Search 758
5.4 Regular Expressions 788
5.5 Data Compression 810
6 Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 853
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 933
Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 954
Clients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 955
viii
This book is intended to survey the most important computer algorithms in use today,
and to teach fundamental techniques to the growing number of people in need of
knowing them. It is intended for use as a textbook for a second course in computer
science, after students have acquired basic programming skills and familiarity with computer
systems. The book also may be useful for self-study or as a reference for people engaged in
the development of computer systems or applications programs, since it contains implementations
of useful algorithms and detailed information on performance characteristics and
clients. The broad perspective taken makes the book an appropriate introduction to the field.
the study of algorithms and data structures is fundamental to any computerscience
curriculum, but it is not just for programmers and computer-science students. Everyone
who uses a computer wants it to run faster or to solve larger problems. The algorithms
in this book represent a body of knowledge developed over the last 50 years that has become
indispensable. From N-body simulation problems in physics to genetic-sequencing problems
in molecular biology, the basic methods described here have become essential in scientific
research; from architectural modeling systems to aircraft simulation, they have become essential
tools in engineering; and from database systems to internet search engines, they have
become essential parts of modern software systems. And these are but a few examples—as the
scope of computer applications continues to grow, so grows the impact of the basic methods
covered here.
Before developing our fundamental approach to studying algorithms, we develop data
types for stacks, queues, and other low-level abstractions that we use throughout the book.
Then we survey fundamental algorithms for sorting, searching, graphs, and strings. The last
chapter is an overview placing the rest of the material in the book in a larger context.
PREFACE
ix
Distinctive features The orientation of the book is to study algorithms likely to be of
practical use. The book teaches a broad variety of algorithms and data structures and provides
sufficient information about them that readers can confidently implement, debug, and
put them to work in any computational environment. The approach involves:
Algorithms. Our descriptions of algorithms are based on complete implementations and on
a discussion of the operations of these programs on a consistent set of examples. Instead of
presenting pseudo-code, we work with real code, so that the programs can quickly be put to
practical use. Our programs are written in Java, but in a style such that most of our code can
be reused to develop implementations in other modern programming languages.
Data types. We use a modern programming style based on data abstraction, so that algorithms
and their data structures are encapsulated together.
Applications. Each chapter has a detailed description of applications where the algorithms
described play a critical role. These range from applications in physics and molecular biology,
to engineering computers and systems, to familiar tasks such as data compression and searching
on the web.
A scientific approach. We emphasize developing mathematical models for describing the
performance of algorithms, using the models to develop hypotheses about performance, and
then testing the hypotheses by running the algorithms in realistic contexts.
Breadth of coverage. We cover basic abstract data types, sorting algorithms, searching algorithms,
graph processing, and string processing. We keep the material in algorithmic context,
describing data structures, algorithm design paradigms, reduction, and problem-solving
models. We cover classic methods that have been taught since the 1960s and new methods
that have been invented in recent years.
Our primary goal is to introduce the most important algorithms in use today to as wide an
audience as possible. These algorithms are generally ingenious creations that, remarkably, can
each be expressed in just a dozen or two lines of code. As a group, they represent problemsolving
power of amazing scope. They have enabled the construction of computational artifacts,
the solution of scientific problems, and the development of commercial applications
that would not have been feasible without them.
x
Booksite An important feature of the book is its relationship to the booksite
algs4.cs.princeton.edu. This site is freely available and contains an extensive amount of
material about algorithms and data structures, for teachers, students, and practitioners, including:
An online synopsis. The text is summarized in the booksite to give it the same overall structure
as the book, but linked so as to provide easy navigation through the material.
Full implementations. All code in the book is available on the booksite, in a form suitable for
program development. Many other implementations are also available, including advanced
implementations and improvements described in the book, answers to selected exercises, and
client code for various applications. The emphasis is on testing algorithms in the context of
meaningful applications.
Exercises and answers. The booksite expands on the exercises in the book by adding drill
exercises (with answers available with a click), a wide variety of examples illustrating the
reach of the material, programming exercises with code solutions, and challenging problems.
Dynamic visualizations. Dynamic simulations are impossible in a printed book, but the
website is replete with implementations that use a graphics class to present compelling visual
demonstrations of algorithm applications.
Course materials. A complete set of lecture slides is tied directly to the material in the book
and on the booksite. A full selection of programming assignments, with check lists, test data,
and preparatory material, is also included.
Links to related material. Hundreds of links lead students to background information about
applications and to resources for studying algorithms.
Our goal in creating this material was to provide a complementary approach to the ideas.
Generally, you should read the book when learning specific algorithms for the first time or
when trying to get a global picture, and you should use the booksite as a reference when programming
or as a starting point when searching for more detail while online.
xi
Use in the curriculum The book is intended as a textbook in a second course in computer
science. It provides full coverage of core material and is an excellent vehicle for students
to gain experience and maturity in programming, quantitative reasoning, and problemsolving.
Typically, one course in computer science will suffice as a prerequisite—the book is
intended for anyone conversant with a modern programming language and with the basic
features of modern computer systems.
The algorithms and data structures are expressed in Java, but in a style accessible to
people fluent in other modern languages. We embrace modern Java abstractions (including
generics) but resist dependence upon esoteric features of the language.
Most of the mathematical material supporting the analytic results is self-contained (or
is labeled as beyond the scope of this book), so little specific preparation in mathematics is
required for the bulk of the book, although mathematical maturity is definitely helpful. Applications
are drawn from introductory material in the sciences, again self-contained.
The material covered is a fundamental background for any student intending to major
in computer science, electrical engineering, or operations research, and is valuable for any
student with interests in science, mathematics, or engineering.
Context The book is intended to follow our introductory text, An Introduction to Programming
in Java: An Interdisciplinary Approach, which is a broad introduction to the field.
Together, these two books can support a two- or three-semester introduction to computer science
that will give any student the requisite background to successfully address computation
in any chosen field of study in science, engineering, or the social sciences.
The starting point for much of the material in the book was the Sedgewick series of Algorithms
books. In spirit, this book is closest to the first and second editions of that book, but
this text benefits from decades of experience teaching and learning that material. Sedgewick’s
current Algorithms in C/C++/Java, Third Edition is more appropriate as a reference or a text
for an advanced course; this book is specifically designed to be a textbook for a one-semester
course for first- or second-year college students and as a modern introduction to the basics
and a reference for use by working programmers.
xii
Acknowledgments This book has been nearly 40 years in the making, so full recognition
of all the people who have made it possible is simply not feasible. Earlier editions of this
book list dozens of names, including (in alphabetical order) Andrew Appel, Trina Avery, Marc
Brown, Lyn Dupré, Philippe Flajolet, Tom Freeman, Dave Hanson, Janet Incerpi, Mike Schidlowsky,
Steve Summit, and Chris Van Wyk. All of these people deserve acknowledgement,
even though some of their contributions may have happened decades ago. For this fourth
edition, we are grateful to the hundreds of students at Princeton and several other institutions
who have suffered through preliminary versions of the work, and to readers around the world
for sending in comments and corrections through the booksite.
We are grateful for the support of Princeton University in its unwavering commitment
to excellence in teaching and learning, which has provided the basis for the development of
this work.
Peter Gordon has provided wise counsel throughout the evolution of this work almost
from the beginning, including a gentle introduction of the “back to the basics” idea that is
the foundation of this edition. For this fourth edition, we are grateful to Barbara Wood for
her careful and professional copyediting, to Julie Nahil for managing the production, and
to many others at Pearson for their roles in producing and marketing the book. All were extremely
responsive to the demands of a rather tight schedule without the slightest sacrifice to
the quality of the result.
Robert Sedgewick
Kevin Wayne
Princeton, NJ
January, 2011
This page intentionally left blank
1.1 Basic Programming Model. . . . . . . . . 8
1.2 Data Abstraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
1.3 Bags, Queues, and Stacks . . . . . . . 120
1.4 Analysis of Algorithms . . . . . . . . . 172
1.5 Case Study: Union-Find. . . . . . . . . 216
ONE
Fundamentals
The objective of this book is to study a broad variety of important and useful
algorithms—methods for solving problems that are suited for computer implementation.
Algorithms go hand in hand with data structures—schemes for organizing
data that leave them amenable to efficient processing by an algorithm. This
chapter introduces the basic tools that we need to study algorithms and data structures.
First, we introduce our basic programming model. All of our programs are implemented
using a small subset of the Java programming language plus a few of our own
libraries for input/output and for statistical calculations. Section 1.1 is a summary of
language constructs, features, and libraries that we use in this book.
Next, we emphasize data abstraction, where we define abstract data types (ADTs) in
the service of modular programming. In Section 1.2 we introduce the process of implementing
an ADT in Java, by specifying an applications programming interface (API)
and then using the Java class mechanism to develop an implementation for use in client
code.
As important and useful examples, we next consider three fundamental ADTs: the
bag, the queue, and the stack. Section 1.3 describes APIs and implementations of bags,
queues, and stacks using arrays, resizing arrays, and linked lists that serve as models and
starting points for algorithm implementations throughout the book.
Performance is a central consideration in the study of algorithms. Section 1.4 describes
our approach to analyzing algorithm performance. The basis of our approach is
the scientific method: we develop hypotheses about performance, create mathematical
models, and run experiments to test them, repeating the process as necessary.
We conclude with a case study where we consider solutions to a connectivity problem
that uses algorithms and data structures that implement the classic union-find ADT.
3
Algorithms When we write a computer program, we are generally implementing a
method that has been devised previously to solve some problem. This method is often
independent of the particular programming language being used—it is likely to be
equally appropriate for many computers and many programming languages. It is the
method, rather than the computer program itself, that specifies the steps that we can
take to solve the problem. The term algorithm is used in computer science to describe
a finite, deterministic, and effective problem-solving method suitable for implementation
as a computer program. Algorithms are the stuff of computer science: they are
central objects of study in the field.
We can define an algorithm by describing a procedure for solving a problem in a
natural language, or by writing a computer program that implements the procedure,
as shown at right for Euclid’s algorithm for finding the greatest common divisor of
two numbers, a variant of which was devised
over 2,300 years ago. If you are not familiar
with Euclid’s algorithm, you are encouraged
to work Exercise 1.1.24 and Exercise
1.1.25, perhaps after reading Section 1.1. In
this book, we use computer programs to describe
algorithms. One important reason for
doing so is that it makes easier the task of
checking whether they are finite, deterministic,
and effective, as required. But it is also
important to recognize that a program in a
particular language is just one way to express
an algorithm. The fact that many of the algorithms
in this book have been expressed
in multiple programming languages over the
past several decades reinforces the idea that each algorithm is a method suitable for
implementation on any computer in any programming language.
Most algorithms of interest involve organizing the data involved in the computation.
Such organization leads to data structures, which also are central objects of study
in computer science. Algorithms and data structures go hand in hand. In this book we
take the view that data structures exist as the byproducts or end products of algorithms
and that we must therefore study them in order to understand the algorithms. Simple
algorithms can give rise to complicated data structures and, conversely, complicated
algorithms can use simple data structures. We shall study the properties of many data
structures in this book; indeed, we might well have titled the book Algorithms and Data
Structures.
Compute the greatest common divisor of
two nonnegative integers p and q as follows:
If q is 0, the answer is p. If not, divide p by q
and take the remainder r. The answer is the
greatest common divisor of q and r.
public static int gcd(int p, int q)
{
if (q == 0) return p;
int r = p % q;
return gcd(q, r);
}
Euclid’s algorithm
Java-language description
English-language description
4 CHAPTER 1 ■ Fundamentals
When we use a computer to help us solve a problem, we typically are faced with a
number of possible approaches. For small problems, it hardly matters which approach
we use, as long as we have one that correctly solves the problem. For huge problems (or
applications where we need to solve huge numbers of small problems), however, we
quickly become motivated to devise methods that use time and space efficiently.
The primary reason to learn about algorithms is that this discipline gives us the
potential to reap huge savings, even to the point of enabling us to do tasks that would
otherwise be impossible. In an application where we are processing millions of objects,
it is not unusual to be able to make a program millions of times faster by using a welldesigned
algorithm. We shall see such examples on numerous occasions throughout
the book. By contrast, investing additional money or time to buy and install a new
computer holds the potential for speeding up a program by perhaps a factor of only 10
or 100. Careful algorithm design is an extremely effective part of the process of solving
a huge problem, whatever the applications area.
When developing a huge or complex computer program, a great deal of effort must
go into understanding and defining the problem to be solved, managing its complexity,
and decomposing it into smaller subtasks that can be implemented easily. Often,
many of the algorithms required after the decomposition are trivial to implement. In
most cases, however, there are a few algorithms whose choice is critical because most
of the system resources will be spent running those algorithms. These are the types of
algorithms on which we concentrate in this book. We study fundamental algorithms
that are useful for solving challenging problems in a broad variety of applications areas.
The sharing of programs in computer systems is becoming more widespread, so
although we might expect to be using a large fraction of the algorithms in this book, we
also might expect to have to implement only a small fraction of them. For example, the
Java libraries contain implementations of a host of fundamental algorithms. However,
implementing simple versions of basic algorithms helps us to understand them better
and thus to more effectively use and tune advanced versions from a library. More
important, the opportunity to reimplement basic algorithms arises frequently. The primary
reason to do so is that we are faced, all too often, with completely new computing
environments (hardware and software) with new features that old implementations
may not use to best advantage. In this book, we concentrate on the simplest reasonable
implementations of the best algorithms. We do pay careful attention to coding the critical
parts of the algorithms, and take pains to note where low-level optimization effort
could be most beneficial.
The choice of the best algorithm for a particular task can be a complicated process,
perhaps involving sophisticated mathematical analysis. The branch of computer science
that comprises the study of such questions is called analysis of algorithms. Many
CHAPTER 1 ■ Fundamentals 5
of the algorithms that we study have been shown through analysis to have excellent
theoretical performance; others are simply known to work well through experience.
Our primary goal is to learn reasonable algorithms for important tasks, yet we shall also
pay careful attention to comparative performance of the methods. We should not use
an algorithm without having an idea of what resources it might consume, so we strive
to be aware of how our algorithms might be expected to perform.
Summary of topics As an overview, we describe the major parts of the book, giving
specific topics covered and an indication of our general orientation toward the
material. This set of topics is intended to touch on as many fundamental algorithms as
possible. Some of the areas covered are core computer-science areas that we study in
depth to learn basic algorithms of wide applicability. Other algorithms that we discuss
are from advanced fields of study within computer science and related fields. The algorithms
that we consider are the products of decades of research and development and
continue to play an essential role in the ever-expanding applications of computation.
Fundamentals (Chapter 1) in the context of this book are the basic principles and
methodology that we use to implement, analyze, and compare algorithms. We consider
our Java programming model, data abstraction, basic data structures, abstract data
types for collections, methods of analyzing algorithm performance, and a case study.
Sorting algorithms (Chapter 2) for rearranging arrays in order are of fundamental
importance. We consider a variety of algorithms in considerable depth, including insertion
sort, selection sort, shellsort, quicksort, mergesort, and heapsort. We also encounter
algorithms for several related problems, including priority queues, selection,
and merging. Many of these algorithms will find application as the basis for other algorithms
later in the book.
Searching algorithms (Chapter 3) for finding specific items among large collections
of items are also of fundamental importance. We discuss basic and advanced methods
for searching, including binary search trees, balanced search trees, and hashing. We
note relationships among these methods and compare performance.
Graphs (Chapter 4) are sets of objects and connections, possibly with weights and
orientation. Graphs are useful models for a vast number of difficult and important
problems, and the design of algorithms for processing graphs is a major field of study.
We consider depth-first search, breadth-first search, connectivity problems, and several
algorithms and applications, including Kruskal’s and Prim’s algorithms for finding
minimum spanning tree and Dijkstra’s and the Bellman-Ford algorithms for solving
shortest-paths problems.
6 CHAPTER 1 ■ Fundamentals
Strings (Chapter 5) are an essential data type in modern computing applications.
We consider a range of methods for processing sequences of characters. We begin with
faster algorithms for sorting and searching when keys are strings. Then we consider
substring search, regular expression pattern matching, and data-compression algorithms.
Again, an introduction to advanced topics is given through treatment of some
elementary problems that are important in their own right.
Context (Chapter 6) helps us relate the material in the book to several other advanced
fields of study, including scientific computing, operations research, and the theory of
computing. We survey event-based simulation, B-trees, suffix arrays, maximum flow,
and other advanced topics from an introductory viewpoint to develop appreciation for
the interesting advanced fields of study where algorithms play a critical role. Finally, we
describe search problems, reduction, and NP-completeness to introduce the theoretical
underpinnings of the study of algorithms and relationships to material in this book.
The study of algorithms is interesting and exciting because it is a new field
(almost all the algorithms that we study are less than 50 years old, and some were just
recently discovered) with a rich tradition (a few algorithms have been known for hundreds
of years). New discoveries are constantly being made, but few algorithms are
completely understood. In this book we shall consider intricate, complicated, and difficult
algorithms as well as elegant, simple, and easy ones. Our challenge is to understand
the former and to appreciate the latter in the context of scientific and commercial applications.
In doing so, we shall explore a variety of useful tools and develop a style of
algorithmic thinking that will serve us well in computational challenges to come.
CHAPTER 1 ■ Fundamentals 7
1.1 BASIC PROGRAMMING MODEL
Our study of algorithms is based upon implementing them as programs written in
the Java programming language. We do so for several reasons:
■ Our programs are concise, elegant, and complete descriptions of algorithms.
■ You can run the programs to study properties of the algorithms.
■ You can put the algorithms immediately to good use in applications.
These are important and significant advantages over the alternatives of working with
English-language descriptions of algorithms.
A potential downside to this approach is that we have to work with a specific programming
language, possibly making it difficult to separate the idea of the algorithm
from the details of its implementation. Our implementations are designed to mitigate
this difficulty, by using programming constructs that are both found in many modern
languages and needed to adequately describe the algorithms.
